---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: The Linux Operating System and Architecture
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2018-09-18
labels:
  - Operating Systems
  
---

1.	Introduction
1.1.	Linux is the name of a family of open source (4.1) operating systems that are based on the UNIX (4.2) family of operating systems developed in the late 1970’s. This paper begins by exploring a history of how it began along an explanation of the architecture and how the Linux system works. The next sections will begin with a description of the IEEE standards for the POSIX API (4.3) then an explanation of the popularity of Linux and how it is updated and maintained. A separate following section will cover the Debian distro development cycle and the company Red Hat (a major contributor to Linux).  A final section will describe various applications that use Linux kernel based operating systems such as Android and applications of Raspberry Pi. A conclusion at the end is followed by sections for figures and tables along with a glossary for technical terms that are italicized with followed by the section of their definition.

2.	Linux History and Architecture
2.1.	History- Linus Torvalds, a Finnish software engineer, is credited as being the original creator of the Linux kernel in 1991. The kernel was based on the original Unix system and released for free to the software programming community of the early 90’s. Over the following next couple of years, the Linux kernel was adopted by companies Redhat, Debian, and Slackware who each created their own branches of the Linux distribution. Development continued throughout the decade and several notable features were created including the addition of a TCP/IP (4.4) stack, updates to memory management, and more flexibility for running on different hardware. The early 2000’s gave birth to live distributions of variations of Linux available on bootable CD’s to be installed on various types of hardware and large changes to new applications created as well as many more options for distributions of Linux. The Linux Foundation was founded in 2000 to sponsor the creation and development of Linux for various platforms and to defend the community’s freedom to expand and develop its beloved platform. In 2004, Ubuntu version 4.2 was released which allowed many users to use and update the operating system without much previous experience with the existing Linux distros. Linux based platforms continued to grow and on September 23, 2008 the Android operating system was released by Google. Android is a modified version of Linux that is now used in various devices such as smartphones, tablets, TVs, and even gaming consoles. [3]

2.2.	Architecture – Linux was originally developed using C and assembly language for the Intel i386 processor hardware system but now functions on nearly any commercially developed computing system. The kernel is the lowest level of software that is running on a system. It has full access to all the hardware on the machine and is necessarily trusted to perform any operation within the system. High level programs running on the machine are called processes and include applications such as web browsers, word processors, video games, etc. High level applications run at the user-level as opposed to the kernel level. The Linux kernel architecture can be thought of regarding these two layers: user-level and kernel-level which is shown below in Figure 1.
 Figure 1 (User-level vs Kernel-level) [6] The different layers exist to keep applications from interfering with each other by either accidentally or intentionally accessing memory allocated to another application. User applications must request the kernel to write/read different locations of the systems memory. The kernel will then check to see if the application has permission to access and if the memory is within the bounds of the allocated space. User programs must make a system call to do any operation that they are not permitted to do then the kernel acts as a referee to determine if the operation is legal, then does the operation if applicable. Interfaces with hardware also work in a similar fashion with the kernel as a mediator before allowing a process to access networking capabilities, peripherals, etc. The kernel’s operations of mediating are completely transparent to the user-level processes. Through a Hardware Abstraction Layer (3.5) the kernel hides the specifics and limitations of the hardware the system is installed on. Since any process in the user-level must request the kernel to do any system operations for it through the API, the kernel simply translates the request into an applicable procedure with the hardware of the system and performs the operation, then returns the expected data to the requesting process without the process knowing the difference. The kernel also acts to schedule different threads running on the processors available on the machine to ensure each program runs efficiently and to minimize wasted processing cycles. [3,4,5,6]

2.3.	Popularity of Linux OS- Since Linux is an open source software, its kernel code can be widely inspected and modified by any user. Operating systems such as Windows and Mac OSX require purchasing a license to use their kernel on your system and they keep their source code a secret. Because of this, users of Windows and Mac OSX offer users no freedom to modify their kernel to suit their needs and leads to more problems with stability when installing on a hardware system for which they have little support. The appeal in using Linux comes from its offers of unlimited customizability and is so portable by design. Software flexibility along with the fact that Linux has no cost to license, makes it the choice operating system kernel of engineers developing new products with increasingly powerful processing capabilities. With the increase of the need for everyday technology to be able to connect to the internet and have stable user interfaces, Linux has become much more widely used as it has been ported from PCs and servers to cell phones, TVs, and various other high capability electronic systems.

2.4.	POSIX API and Linux Development Cycle- The POSIX API is protocol standardized by IEEE put in place to allow for uniformity among different manufacturers computer systems. UNIX was used for the basis for the POSIX interface because it is considered manufacturer neutral. The protocol includes standard interfaces for the C language, a shell, and thread management. Since the POSIX API is standardized and widely known, many developers can delve into the source code for the Linux kernel and find ways to make it more stable and efficient. Updates for Linux are done in cycles in which a window for developers to submit idea for changes in the form of patches, a modification of code showing which lines should be removed/added. The independent developers each write their own patches to the kernel and then submit them to the Linux foundation. The foundation members then test the patch and if it is deemed to be sufficiently stable it is merged into the kernel code for the next release. Linus Torvalds announces the end of the submission window and the approved patches are included in the next version of the kernel that has the tag “rc” at the end. The “rc” kernels are then further tested for stability over various iterations and more “rc” kernel releases until the kernel is deemed sufficiently stable for a final release. A final release is made, and the process begins again with the announcement of the next submission window. [7]

2.5.	Debian Distro and Red Hat- The Debian distribution has some key differences when creating updates for their kernel. A release will have several different versions of each release with different statuses. The “experimental” status meaning that the release is the version of the software for code that is currently under development. Developers add packages to get feedback from other developers. Much of the code houses serious bugs and is mainly as the title suggests, for experimentation, so the release is not ever migrated into another version. The “unstable” status means that the most up to date packages have been implemented but is still likely to have many bugs. Other users running the unstable version report any bugs encountered to the maintainer of the package affected who then fixes the package. As the package is updated, within 6 hours it is distributed as a fix to each the download mirror for the version. Then after an unstable package has had time get most critical bugs fixed and met certain criteria the package will then migrate into testing. During the testing process, the package may go back to the unstable status and then migrate back to testing multiple times. When the package is found to be tested without error, the package is ready to be included in the “stable” release. [8] 
Red Hat is a development company that has significantly contributed to the development of Linux and sponsors the Fedora operating system. The company makes money distributing a free software by allowing users to pay for support services with the software. Businesses that use their software are willing to pay the extra fee because Red Hat’s software has quality assurance teams backing their releases along with technical support for any business having issues with their software. With the wide use of Linux based operating systems being implemented in various technologies, developers would prefer to go with a software that can be guaranteed to either work or have a support staff to fix it. [9]
2.6.	Android and Raspberry Pi – The Android operating system was originally developed as software for digital cameras until it was purchased by Google and revamped to be implemented for smartphones. The Android operating system uses the Linux kernel for its core processing however, the libraries and interfaces all above the kernel level are specific to Android. Android is a much different operating system than most other Linux operating systems because it has a Linux core but was modified to be specific to the type of hardware it is installed on by removing the C libraries and creating a new virtual machine that is Java based. Because of the differences, Android is not able to run the same applications as typical Linux distribution and vice versa. [10] Raspberry Pi is a series of low-cost mini computers that are fully programmable and many high definition multimedia capabilities. The Raspberry Pi hardware runs on Raspbian, a Debian based Linux OS, but it has not been modified the same way that Android has. A Raspberry Pi uses Linux operating systems much like a PC does. Due to the portability and flexibility of Raspberry Pi, it can be modified to fit almost any application from making a controller for robotics to emulating older video game consoles. [11,12]

3.	Conclusion
3.1.	The Linux kernel’s inherent designed stability and open source nature allow it to be one of the most powerful and flexible feats of engineering in modern history. This is made possible by the massive community of engineers and develops each exploring new avenues and technological applications using the base Linux kernel. The past few decades have seen technological progression in leaps and bounds due to the availability of this software. Most modern appliances now have a smaller sized computing system in them controlling their functions, the majority of which are Linux based. With most people relying on their smartphones in order to function in modern society, it is clear that the development of the Linux kernel has had a massive impact on the advancement of modern technologies.


 
4.	Technical Terms
4.1.	Open Source – Publically accessible software that anyone can modify and share without having to acquire licensing from the creator.
4.2.	UNIX – “Unix is a portable, multitasking, multiuser, time-sharing operating system (OS) originally developed in 1969 by a group of employees at AT&T. Unix was first programmed in assembly language but was reprogrammed in C in 1973 [1].”
4.3.	POSIX API – “(Portable Operating System Interface) is a set of standard operating system interfaces based on the Unix operating system [2].” It is an API (Application Programming Interface) that was standardized by the IEEE to maintain operating system compatibility on different systems.
4.4.	TCP/IP – (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) a set of protocols which standardizes and allows different computers/devices to connect through the internet.
4.5.	Hardware Abstraction Layer – “A module in the operating system that hides specifics of different hardware implementations. Above this layer, the operating system is portable [4].”

5.	References
[1]	Techopedia.com. (2018). What is Unix? - Definition from Techopedia. [online] Available at: https://www.techopedia.com/definition/4637/unix [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[2]	WhatIs.com. (2018). What is POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface)? - Definition from WhatIs.com. [online] Available at: https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/POSIX-Portable-Operating-System-Interface [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[3]	Hayward, D. (2018). The history of Linux: how time has shaped the penguin. [online] TechRadar. Available at: https://www.techradar.com/news/software/operating-systems/the-history-of-linux-how-time-has-shaped-the-penguin-1113914 [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018]
[4]	Anderson, T. and Dahlin, M. (2014). Operating systems. 2nd ed. [S.l.]: Recursive Books.

[5]	Havens, K. (2018). Understanding the architecture of the modern Linux operating system - Cumulus Networks engineering blog. [online] Cumulus Networks engineering blog. Available at: https://cumulusnetworks.com/blog/linux-architecture/ [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[6]	Knowstuffs. (2018). Linux Kernel and Its Architecture. [online] Available at: https://knowstuffs.wordpress.com/2012/06/11/linux-kernel-and-architecture/ [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[7]	Kernel.org. (2018). 2. How the development process works — The Linux Kernel documentation. [online] Available at: https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v4.15/process/2.Process.html [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[8]	Debian-handbook.info. (2018). 1.6. Lifecycle of a Release. [online] Available at: https://debian-handbook.info/browse/stable/sect.release-lifecycle.html [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[9]	TechCrunch. (2018). Why There Will Never Be Another RedHat: The Economics Of Open Source. [online] Available at: https://techcrunch.com/2014/02/13/please-dont-tell-me-you-want-to-be-the-next-red-hat/ [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[10]	Android Authority. (2018). The history of Android OS: its name, origin and more. [online] Available at: https://www.androidauthority.com/history-android-os-name-789433/ [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[11]	Garden, H., Hardware, C. and Basics, H. (2018). How the Raspberry Pi Works. [online] HowStuffWorks. Available at: https://computer.howstuffworks.com/raspberry-pi.htm [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
[12]	Thomas, G. (2018). Raspbian explained. [online] SciFiNow. Available at: https://www.gadgetdaily.xyz/raspbian-explained [Accessed 21 Sep. 2018].
